The price?
Is it really that good to talk about money?
ea495bdfacd244ff833e794adf41cc66
It's expensive, 300,000 euros.
7ac395fd99c7470d966e4249868ef9d3
In France, we don't talk about money.
f02777eb05f64edf9c8e204c5f3087f4
Nordic design has taken the world by storm
for over a hundred years.
91d89c5d1f0443fb905b20b732dece14
I fell in love immediately.
36b14d7f800144e2b8bb700b86c91d95
All rooms with this become: Wow!
511d4089432f42569c86c1375d880c1e
I can't take the furniture to heaven.
d0162d8912a7429f9d0a6e6a97b097ba
But what exactly makes–
e83e4bb507da401d872c7a63bdb4cb91
–Nordic design enchant
collectors from around the world?
8b462440bd2c42f1aae34c1bd8cceae5
Why are wooden sofas and plastic chairs sold
for fantasy sums internationally?
3ad4c5dc73bf4ad6829283846c2f3e45
From modest everyday objects to
immortal pop culture icons–
1f801008f10241e19977841eede2b6ba
–seen both in films
and in the world's most exclusive homes.
c30f44d0c29548c195b2a52e74e885b2
This is a series
about a hundred years of Nordic design–
2dbabd95296945108173a387eb868a3e
–and why it looks the way it does.
2c10f14db6ac46ccb274f21230c16678
The house is located in the middle of the forest.
26b752607de240a0b2bdee7a7504d840
To get here, you have to drive
1.5 km on a gravel road, over some fields.
842c7cf0e6b04f97b3ee03aed962c529
Here in the countryside in Provence,
in southern France–
a58621ab3e574b4cb469176d3ae9b225
–lives the interior architect
Pierre Yovanovitch.
34e86b75698e4af89bc991b386f9d06e
His castle is filled
with Nordic design–
98540b76f3904186876ed490bcc8b24b
–that he has collected
over two decades.
43f99a67a7d0432ca982c01708bd194e
Here I can really
come close to myself.
dd269691dd92469d8383581539c60a41
It's important to find yourself.
9e9e117e2e704be0b0e8681b2696b3f5
This place exudes a kind of poetry,
just like the Nordic furniture.
a1cd405d06294be289181ed808de5251
When I started collecting such furniture
a long time ago–
430cfdcd6f70419282b955e24d5e7912
–I was touched by the simple forms–
15c5ff4ecfa544b38a124fe0203319e5
–and by sensing
the craftsman's hand.
f5469b7c8cd54ed180176594c6b4ae51
Nordic design is not only loved and coveted
by collectors around the world.
0e2d8fa73a6e4b4b9317406240352c69
It also carries
a winding history.
a2e086b8318b426995cf012e095c115a
About the past, present, and the designers.
7902e1e01ac3495eb9d56b40e2619682
What does an American Christian sect
have to do with Nordic design?
6060daa060f84e65b6b7ab375cfa158d
And why is Kim Kardashian crazy
about Swedish cabin furniture?
d122083788b540d0954f62c8e48802b5
And how could death and misery
become the start of a design paradise?
6d52c07b763d42999f2fdb3479bed278
1920s in Europe.
World War I is over–
3b288ae51d1a4ee6b8abd0025119134a
–and the Spanish flu that killed around
a hundred million people is over.
4e7ff595332a4b15a8c8978e0799f77e
There is a collective sense
of optimism.
0908da8a21e3418c87d23d9b7b0d0297
And in homes, electrical lighting
is beginning to be installed.
4b3bf758eedd45efa15cab34411a9593
The new world is no longer dark.
51ad7fb8e9364fdaa995b6423ac5f220
It must have been incredible
to get electrical light.
ca2b044c341d4acc8b3c377ad34d9645
At first, they were weak carbon filament lamps–
6e246b8b3fb34a018f0cdb5e7998ce4d
–but they were stronger
than the light they had before.
43d378c0bc6c440586d7b2dac88a711e
But the new light also shows things
that shouldn't be shown.
248379563fc14ae0b30ca27d54d61f41
Like the body's and face's
inescapable aging.
64ee0d7daae242f380171fd45940c81b
A fact that the young Danish
Poul Henningsen becomes aware of.
151e85383fdf4b828102c8df9cc7f790
When they get electrical light at home,
Poul Henningsen was 13 years old–
21a0fb74ca134a8da2a7baae7da08fb1
–and his mother doesn't like
the strong light source.
a0c831900b4b493bae73379baf9dca93
Like all respectable people,
she was vain. She wanted to look good.
91cfc3cedd034d279166e48713032724
So when we moved from gas lamps
to electrical light–
0d833d5de8e844aea0a9010a2bca845c
–she reacted negatively.
42ea722a418944b7806e4d399bb652f0
Then she didn't think she was pretty.
aa7642f361364d9ba73301d9ce5139b8
Poul Henningsen goes completely
into creating–
05c711f6b3bf436782168de2d7618fab
–a soft, glare-free
and forgiving light for his mother–
a922a72b349a4d2ca055b1f72d975d33
–the author and feminist
Agnes Henningsen.
c0ad969311314e2a9db8db255dc58187
It was incredibly primitive
and very exciting–
b05929cec49b48ea98cb5f2bec44cb7a
–and I knew very little
about things and stuff.
f474da0753b94919a8d440fd2349c9cf
But the work develops quickly
into something much larger.
63945ae93a6940f2a5ad54d54f3974fe
Poul Henningsen is convinced–
147ee32383204a13ba31f944dc0637db
–that he can change and improve
all people's lives with his lamps.
756bcf5a7fda4e3ca3e1c654867b832e
After ten years of experimentation,
Poul Henningsen gets the commission–
6bde686ef99c4474a3d04457bc2770e9
–to light up the entire Danish pavilion–
1e0a542f8b954dc6afa7e227b7e3c315
–at the international
crafts exhibition in Paris.
f76a1eadc8bf4da6a901d8682462996c
They were seven-screen lamps in different
sizes, in fine and shiny silver.
2c8f7e3526c34cbca3e3f05ae1dbb785
Henningsen came up with the best way
to work with the new light bulbs–
0bb1c766a82443eca09c3d5775b6cf1a
–was to hide the filaments
and let the screens reflect the light out.
d7d8594699604bc99b848b732cee167
Over six months, he developed
the classic three-screen PH lamp–
671b5cba50db4c2b8d8ae9059a0da7ad
–with saucer-, bowl-, and cup-shapes.
e1e1b665d8214f61b15f8e6c2d0463f8
The Danish success is a fact.
8d4ee238e7c34ce0802550ca02829e01
But Poul Henningsen doesn't stop there.
f9903aca568a4a55a89c439a37043bba
Throughout his life, he works to create
the world's most pleasant light.
0e64ad4caa36461fbdd476a778c6eab1
The boy who wanted
to make his mother beautiful–
433419bcf92248c6b9832678185d55f3
–now spreads light across the world.
6bfc363c3c354788a82a88d5e4b6c116
For it's far from only
Danish mothers who want to be beautiful.
d274d0eff71443c1ac83c70e44e43c85
It was the light that created the form.
7a6170435a184547909ef57893f36f72
It was the new era's lamp design.
099306804eb743708fbe355bb913f447
It looked incredibly strange then, for
we had never seen anything like it.
86b3d34ce8f940e691e2f6e5ba2f97d2
The ceiling lamp is by Paavo Tynell.
It becomes airy with the brass wires–
d2291a313e2f423188102379f148d46d
–and with all the flakes floating.
e8becc7549d84df4bb9eb362a96149d7
When the lamp is lit, the light is reflected
in the brass nets above.
d9dd78d050c14bc381ce83315c13ac6b
It gives a golden light.
8b09c37b500a4e949934ea9067883622
This poetry is typical, I think,
of the era's Finnish design.
200444cbd375495da4aba3a799de7914
It's the most beautiful
that he has created.
8d2bb24511e34a248cc59f0ec3ab72e5
The Finnish snowflake lamp
from the late 40s–
4e404a039490439a9e49c8a305be2be3
–reflects the designer Paavo Tynell's
nature-romantic period.
fc094ae42f67479a96bd60651f55fad4
But the Nordic style that Pierre
Yovanovitch has fallen in love with most–
d76feccb366a4b0cbf4b4cd001f55abc
–comes from the 1920s.
8d54e9bcff20454f99d6167b8ba9ce7b
I got an aesthetic shock when I saw
Folke Bensow's bench in Swedish Grace.
77a18fb750374fbda84faa247d12153d
A bench in wood and cast iron–
1ee95a22edd74c7a8a5389e829208d07
–that I bought immediately,
without knowing anything about Swedish Grace.
e6b7a91c107b4142a7fe0236e71c17a4
In Paris, where Poul Henningsen shows
lamps that make mothers beautiful–
31448e5257594c48b26687cdbef27477
–Sweden exhibits modern
craft in glass and cast iron.
d59f57dce4334a0aa92acf69041d746b
One of the exhibitors
is the designer Anna Petrus.
570dfdddbb8448f98038ee4b16f5c8cc
At the Paris exhibition,
Anna Petrus makes pillars–
584bc33eb83c41148ff53defe7a6112a
–or eight columns in cast iron, which
support a dome with a light inlet.
7827a65c7c1f466fb4bc4dab041ed064
This was new. Cast iron pillars existed
on railway stations in the 1800s–
0b112308b8de464b9365aa08b8d0b562
–but what Petrus does is sculptural–
584df43204d94219888d23f229e36976
–an artistic addition
to the cast iron pillar.
163e8095c2c8440ab6ebf3b91bc23abe
Grandma was a real professional woman.
40efd3a9078b47f68cd00d0b76125b7d
This is hard work
in these materials.
c756429d96ef48af95a68a7fd0817a4f
Her hands were strong.
0aeb5e68707043ad9ebe202277333b1b
She was quite slender, but her hands
were strong from the hard work.
03ba457c60b94cdabf73925243b64e0c
But behind the innovative form language
lies a dark history.
8358079b8755499bacb09beb039ae73b
She is originally a sculptor–
6f317e36fa88431ebdb2c71c302d335c
–and has worked in stone and made
sculpture, that is, art sculpture–
9c405b24673e4f07a656dcb7d50b497b
–but then her studio burns down.
b0f72c756a804ef8856c83810e1d40bf
Grandpa always slept like a log,
Anna had taken sleeping pills–
a6ed737745174a209a098c52b77408dd
–and my mom
was only a year old.
7868d54e7a274465bf6e71e7cd25d7b0
When the firefighters kicked in
the door to their apartment, they woke up.
ce2a448e64f74babb22334919e90467e
And they saved mom in the last second.
c24fd5ac2838424b846b84639169eabc
Grandpa said when they tried to save
some of the art inside:
6143271b5c40487787b4fc7d92401074
"Let the stone stand, for it will survive."
But it didn't. It cracked.
5721ae3080434361aeb0dc70a93e6280
She loses her entire identity,
her artistry–
b01aba9d3cc1405fb94165f48e640dfa
–and she can't reload
her sculptural activity.
4c1f5e9a5dd941828212751eca146cf3
Anna Petrus sets off on a long
journey to Southern Europe and North Africa.
6c119eca46434f03989f988de53b610e
And during the same time,
a world sensation is discovered.
8225fe0fc0a842f38d63876dfd95bd06
The discovery of Tutankhamun's aesthetics
and the Egyptian new-simplicity–
afc1ece414064b138ccb60fbda3d6b67
–inspired the whole world, in fact.
b436bd423fa94893beb68939b891424e
The long journey makes
Anna Petrus find her spark again.
0c3bb749f92d471ebf707fbfc7e798ef
She finds back
her artistic identity–
1a132db53e4e4535aa62cb5ae0b583e2
–and begins to create what
at the Paris exhibition–
3a8880f6f93a4e32894e98123d4dec45
–becomes both her and Sweden's
breakthrough as a design nation.
c6280cc5852f4ce19d95786c8584d29e
Her newfound style gets a name later,
Swedish Grace.
1f53291c67f1466b8d6619f9637e7441
It means that one actually picks elements, forms and materials–
ebd32c71bee94af5a31571cee4e060ca
–from the whole world, like Antiquity
and prehistoric Egypt.
ffa4f6201079451f8feba0510f8656cc
And then one puts together these elements
and applies them to one's design.
8ee2549a3eba4f188a2f7ae3543e8a71
It was a very elegant design.
9317b3e3d3f541da963c40bc094c6ca2
It was strict
but well-proportioned and harmonious.
b6e7391433984668a50732783550f3e7
With careful details
and high quality.
04bc4db5353948189a0998e2b38894ba
On the exhibition is also shown
another example of Swedish Grace.
42c3abac2ff54ef8a5ec4b77f9230442
Just like Anna Petrus–
8283c2a7cb814314a1083b682bd02fa4
–the artists Simon Gate and
Edward Hald at the Orrefors glassworks–
f6db7b505fe0424db439e9e95d0adbc5
–have let themselves be inspired
by the art of the surroundings.
6e8da2161657440bb3af792a2a725eab
And it is that which gets a new life
in the Swedish glass.
4b2e3458c0d04a0cb30459351ee0ed90
They had developed the art of glass
in a new way.
010cb001e4a446539029d597dd3393b1
They had come up with new techniques
and worked a lot with etched glass–
812b7cea24f94dce8d936f9ebca9a573
–where they could tell stories
on the glass.
875f526ece9c44cd939c564f96943009
When we came to Orrefors,
the cut crystal was standard–
012e4dba44f94b0a91ac96ece7cfd2fa
–and we want to get away from
the more banal crystal cutting–
fdd499b08c2748eb833c7c6cb4f05846
–because there were no fun patterns.
5454a0b9d75f4c9785cf2c06c271adbe
When artists step into the glassworks,
everything changes.
3d62c7e5859c420ea1be719d265efd3f
The Swedish glass would never
have made such an impact in the world–
9d2288dbfa374b5ea0f402bac45ab9af
–if artists hadn't had
free hands in the glassworks.
8e27e000ce4e4572b65b4e55eaa75f0d
It was the Swedish Crafts Association
that set up a mediation office.
4b2b6cf4ea8640899234db21595a768c
Every industry that wants a profile
must start working with an artist.
bdbecb4fbc284c1f958b702e35913184
Swedish Crafts Association sees how
the agricultural society in rapid pace–
b7402e7ac6464e4c8b0705eb899dcef8
–transforms
into a modern industrial society–
3b513b64bd214c6a89e169a5d2cde7c1
–where everyday items
are mass-produced cheaply.
96a569922f5c4e45bcdabfcc5245bc0a
The old crafts risk disappearing
in the same rapid pace–
988efee9b8e1425e90095b903e56b901
–as the efficient machines
churn out new objects.
ac1150e7d31f457282964b9ca3ee358b
With great self-confidence–
9d3551f392f142c48a2fc614ee5c7c91
–the artists Simon Gate
and Edward Hald take place in the glassworks.
f8558630e24a40fe9f938040d2c39f04
In the works, one actually acts as if
one were a director in a drama–
c2d9b550ec31442caf36629211ed8754
–where the fire, the glassblower and those
one works with to some extent direct.
5ecfa3a03a7f489fa6d17abe07fceb22
The free artist's place if he
wants to do something, it is in the factory.
3860e735195447b3a1a746b527c2242b
He can't draw something, send it down
and let people do it–
d6d57e985b934c283d3b7c946f7655d
–without him being there himself.
c6813dddc9164ea080188f09554f495e
Royalties
and film stars like Greta Garbo–
271d5e6c19194f369a36707cfd71979a
–shuttle traffic
to the Swedish glassworks–
506aad2e591549a9adcc23a8e3bef71c
–to see
the modern crafts.
1c184ca766ad4d7a8cb448b111acaf97
And the Swedish glass
spreads across the world.
3d2a20f4a58549289e87a07422abf2a7
Exquisite Orrefors items like these
receive prominent placements all over the world.
abea0a09342b4a9e86e9b851a1348c44
The Emperor of Ethiopia
owns the crystal service–
5c1a6d8c8c6a4120ada3e3b8c48fedfb
–and this has been ordered
by the President of Mexico.
feaa84d101754be096c5b251314a7252
Nation or culture doesn't matter,
these beauty values are appreciated by all.
56792f5435b34bf8906cde3bd508bd76
Pierre Yovanovitch wants that the poetry
he has created in his home in Provence–
5a55071e5ce24a30b6967f0ff64ecb66
–also exists in the residences
he designs around the world.
04e009cb34b64c279a0a2ad7f70588ed
That is why some of the world's
most exclusive residences–
89e0cf922e934710b27629bbb6f0f5da
–are furnished with Nordic design.
87dd907f7ecb425f8454936a062936ba
I believe that the Nordic design
has perhaps been influenced by the lifestyle.
5f7e935493304510970411ae21daf0b6
There is a kind of equality
in Sweden, Denmark and Finland.
5db6a541105e45c19b53e81f58b47137
This combination, the complexity,
with both simplicity and hidden elegance.
9267336c6b274c01bd0f2eecc944ad8b
Beautiful design
doesn't have to be overworked.
ebd4c4416db34855a0a3b05c5b664282
For me, it's the strength of
Danish, Swedish and Finnish furniture.
d68bf5ef495f4b078488d4eeb40eabfd
The fine materials, the fine design
and the timeless appeal to me.
13b4c497a09f4872ae6a17a73883b5da
A truly functional architecture–
e0857e3c6bc645abb457e074ebd6b1ed
–focuses on man's life.
6cbfd03e62a445e5bf394521d6c66155
This is, so to speak,
architecture's spiritual working principle.
bd33a20ce7d345a8abd38f7f0d4e4e09
Alvar Aalto is in the late 20s
a young architect with his ear to the ground–
e9adce268c0e494c97d802e42aff2d7b
–his gaze towards the future
and his heart with the little man.
92bea68bbe76495d94a61192d10a7e73
He is also part of
an intense international conversation–
f9810253ac484dc7b4519531872fbd5c
–about modern architecture
and its role in society.
41955521b81847d7813a7cf5299c7f8a
That the architect should take social responsibility
for societal development–
f01d980cad804afeac53c049f29fe2cb
–is also an important part of the German
architect school Bauhaus ideology.
85a0c113a62e4f129f7af38e7926a09f
Bauhaus works according to the conviction–
4d9d4f90f34f41e2aa9c5accaedf73ee
–that all art forms,
including architecture, belong together–
8ea771b6ec144e48b4f9f376dd0f8c3c
–that art
should be for everyone in everyday life.
222d567dcf8743bbac51a980b41e863f
Bauhaus ideas are a harbinger–
4970a6ae181f45e9bda8a399a827c562
–of what the future will not resemble
anything the world has seen.
a3dd5dd8999a4e8e9b629045be2103fb
This is the beginning of functionalism.
8b05855f99ed4027b4b76cf737006737
But in Alvar Aalto's Finland, the homes,
like in the rest of Europe–
5b6de1e2636d4ce48117793626936197
–are cramped, dirty and draughty.
cbc6593caf6c46abaebcb50f75ea6e42
The hygiene in the residences
is often neglected–
6191545815914ce4a5cc49250fc213cc
–and infections spread easily and quickly,
not least tuberculosis.
cc951ae15c21446ab6cc7544d1ceba12
A disease that in the 1800s killed
around a million Europeans. Every year.
134d57f5b0834481929e6b1149c8aafc
Tuberculosis sanatoriums are built on
high or seaside locations.
4784706d0c2f4795aa87307584c43ce8
Fresh air is considered
the best remedy.
f7c8e44b55de4562b927fa2177d1bb9b
But the truth is
that no fresh air in the world–
35aa2fac0722440ab350cd4fbaab66be
–can stop the infection from spreading
without antibiotics–
c3fc0a2d90494668a9d552b77b83506b
–as long as the residences and living
conditions look like they do.
08e97fe734c04b679a009747588525b6
Tuberculosis was really bad.
f412bbf74cf845ecad8b3773a022f97f
In those days, it
harvested 7,000–10,000 lives per year in Finland.
b3143b2e7c134da3ae3eb2ec4a15adb7
It is now
the young idealistic Alvar Aalto–
8d7f428a877f4f43a5963f6a093504cc
–designs a strange house in the pine forest
in southern Finland, Pemar sanatorium.
5c0c52744aca4725b6e061707c8b636c
He is filled
with Bauhaus school ideas–
a623f8c86e68493c829a12741d607eb4
–and wants architecture
to start from the little man.
cffd66d1f5794dbfa4df7182014e9c52
A building with wave forms
and with the radical idea–
33be46ecfda14b81a576d46fe63257a1
–that also
color, sound, light and pines–
5e346feb335041909f3afe396babad93
–can be part
of curing the tuberculosis patients.
a45c401385d741b8a25150c2b1386150
In the sanatorium, everything
started from the human experience.
7f1187549ae644aba6080cfdcbbc5a31
Architecture built on the human
and how she could be made healthy.
f5597e5cde3148b3b48d021a7d3ef092
The whole building is full of innovations
and examples of that.
e0c7cf0064b84626affa39a261bc205f
Alvar Aalto's architecture starts
not only from the little man.
c3c53582ca494763bd213597b18e478b
It also starts from himself.
a4e300399d644931b603867db3b72fda
Alvar Aalto has previously
been hospitalized–
262a38893def4cabadb78c2677dbe353
–an experience that now shapes
the entire Pemar sanatorium.
eb63cb92279c4634b456318b511d8847
He believes that an overly rational
architecture is not good for man.
2601c4421ba842abb1803f4797727387
He wants the hospital environment
to go hand in hand with the sensual–
56ed9db8edcf489c8ab5c58122c04e03
–that which the lying man
sees and hears.
5d3d223c65fe40d0981064ec7fb928c8
What one starts with
must still be an ideology–
bf2232c91df14803bf559701419c7b67
–that all the time aims at how
she lives, the little man there.
0e086fcbe3144d65a812e8fd5471cf35
How can we make it better for her,
but not only physically better?
8403720804a04a52b07255e994b5de2e
The lying man
was everything's core.
91a7be75c24a4c3a8ec69023473bd129
What she experienced and saw.
2a817091278a4d5a9e6cfc730aed22db
How she experienced
the soothing, blue-green ceiling.
827c146dcad840da85564b9625027336
Acoustics...
It was also a new invention here.
2ddbf48993914c79b756da93c60666b8
But the most essential was that the window
was placed asymmetrically in the room–
b1a0778f9f024b5d8ab8585a4d061148
–so that man always
could see a tree – a pine.
fb346c4831d34413a1753c96a60dbe40
This was the first time–
899d40591f064d749535e91e981e138d
–that man and nature became as
important in architecture and recovery.
6bc1cd155d394c3bad7b3b5754f8e1c0
Behind some of the interior
in Pemar sanatorium–
7270856614fa4624a98fe4191d550d3b
–stands also the architect Aino Aalto,
Alvar's life- and work partner.
b43b068188e64e2588f7307eecc60c53
Aino chose the yellow floor mat.
c7f5ee7d2dbb49feba7624fcfdbe2be6
I think it's the sanatorium's sun.
e3a88df4b56444fca658fcc8c2d14f14
She had chosen it
while Alvar was away on a trip.
238717a979bb48f3877b750a6d73aee5
When Alvar came back,
he got a little shocked.
7c8e74b66a1a4e188af23f1e99847621
He tried to cancel the order,
in vain.
9eeea0e03e2c4111a5eae4f543ea96ef
The function must have respect.
We must have an idea from where we start.
6ae00cbbc5fa4dd1b138f27d3d2f9771
It is life that we are saving,
and not making only form.
16624853c3924617bd24d4b81937a290
The wave is a recurring form
for Alvar Aalto.
32e190775f5a4bb8858b575e68c690ab
He uses it also
in the sanatorium's armchairs.
f105d8754ce040aea25d01b2a8fd12a1
But not just for beauty's sake.
It has a healing effect.
33b4167802dd4722bb6c5b180df73b49
In it, one becomes very straight in the back.
2560dcd5f750408a89a6e13f343ab713
In the chair's grooves behind the back
one lays the hands.
36d9870b8cd8480b8103b34a33c1774e
The chest opens, the posture becomes good
and it feels good to breathe.
4b3879dfb73a41d981f7800323cd77c0
That was Aalto's thought.
b65c382113e0404091e5b4e4a5bbfe83
Many know Aalto
for his wonderful bentwood chairs.
3f8d3fd9822a42518ddefecd6ffae55c
They have come into mass production and
are the starting point for a furniture industry.
af812e8c25f24de894ff95b733d00031
With Otto Korhonen developed Aalto
the technique with bending wood.
48fa7697d6af48ac80631952c5e03d1f
Since it is a matter of solid wood–
7872128832824190b4868230eff916a6
–the frame becomes very stable.
0b8d02cd71634816bab51262491fbd65
The sanatorium in Pemar goes from being
a place of disease and death–
9eab31a7d8a142588d6f98a4fcafe2af
–to being a place
of recovery and life–
54fab5b7956a4c298d64e6d27f0ab889
–and a design paradise
that makes Alvar Aalto world-famous.
6c698575df084ffabe46db6e603ee0cc
But it is also the start
of Alvar Aalto as furniture designer.
de64cbde950d43b1b500e287de7af8d0
And it is now he invents the L-leg.
d3df65118ac74c4b99a1963fa0ac2c57
The ingenious with the L-leg
is its simplicity–
a32f7d8339624e9b9e377f3a4faf4193
–which required a lot of experiments.
a6113e6323864ef58696e4ab3b9687cf
Here one has thus sawn
solid birch wood in slices.
c3d0757da4a84419af81eb0a887df2eb
We used thus wood veneer–
b28f227657ad4904af085f7edc9ec132
–and a lot of glue,
high heat and steam bending.
36c738dc6f014eec8756ab06615f183d
In this way we got a right-angled L-leg
that forms a very stable structure.
5127daac52fe492aa49bdb31fac797c9
Aalto strikes the world with amazement with
the durable L-leg in bent laminated wood.
f36b02e2e18a458e9a77c3d7e21f8954
The result becomes
the stackable Stool 60–
01a1df967f844486af0f2b0fcabf9fb1
–a stool with three L-shaped legs.
b3ae0de5f2574586b3968ed8223d8597
The response was massive.
The stool became a commercial product.
170eb98f96f04929b6e6d43ea1b459eb
Alvar Aalto takes patent
on bending wood–
fbe190e0bf174bfebcc91a8de45c355b
–and the great international
interest in him and his furniture–
b12ddd7a7aef4d35b18bdb3f665b1158
–gives Finland an identity
as a design country.
b40ab1a3b07c40958dded171fb420301
But it takes until he gets
the same recognition at home.
07a7ab0ce86b4368a18d35f5b2a9cb57
How comes so much good architecture
from Finland?
42556249b2f149ba8b1e028ea2ff9352
The first question is if it really
is so good. I am a bit skeptical.
886b2a664e96400d911df908988a40b8
The country's isolated location
and its linguistic isolation–
d96e9f1985da44ceb1736944bbbdd609
–perhaps in some way
have contributed to it.
f9d88287f510446d824b5c35b864568d
Architecture and music are the cultural
fields that do not need translation.
14a8327b51bc489aa787113697f9a602
One can mechanically translate, but
the spirit is difficult to grasp.
fa041f17deba4a61911333097366511c
The wavy lines in Pemar
sanatorium and in the Pemar chair–
9ce5b759dd864c07a638496cdd116eb4
–are also present
when Alvar and Aino Aalto make glass.
fda44c2c1676434883cca1cb8566c7d3
The name Aalto means "wave" in Finnish.
01fc41e430e54468aad81f012f3d6f26
The world changes skin in rapid pace.
f9eee426a7254c628376179bbf12f1f8
Bauhaus school's ideas about form,
function, art and technology belong together–
23273607552f49a1b6024bd533f92fe8
–spread across the world and are the beginning
of what is called "functionalism".
5d9108bb1f5d4d11b8b4a02de666a2f0
But the new style
is not entirely unknown.
5ac1e9e9373c4d69a72ab8fe06538d7c
An American Christian sect, the Shakers–
c31eaac9f0934691bfdd7cf19495718b
–began as early as the 1700s
to create functionalist furniture–
ffa1a671b3464ef4a7b712e6ac3c7ae4
–furniture where the function
played the main role–
12f4e8f2abcd4945831b38b10698e6cf
–and the decoration had
a most marginal secondary role.
799843a751d74859b47c986e45f9aa46
They had with them rural furniture
from Europe, which they then improved–
a9c2e61ad6d447d0b32bc415a94cf70e
–so that they become incredibly beautiful,
graceful and light–
81d664ed427a41c78f8ce84dee241925
–and intended for a type of industrial
production, or mass production.
f43dac5bd8864b63b8801cc2d847da7b
The Danish designer Kaare Klint
is a diplomatic blend–
05a0fe1818fb456392bf8ca85ad2f40a
–of the new functionalism and the
old traditional craftsmanship.
f2c4bd7551744c03be9cb427c071ad4c
Kaare Klint was
a forward-looking modernist–
edf57b4622da4e48b70c362ebbe3cd34
–who wanted to give everything proportions
that worked for people.
a4ed067d6991467ea95c8f4dfe43d566
He was functionalist but conservative–
02bcd1099c0b499abf33c6b053368d80
–a traditionalist who looked backward.
e1e9ee57221f4d72b9d1f665af0a6576
He draws inspiration
from the whole world–
7105d446a0894db0ade426874e6b53d0
–which he refines and simplifies in
durable materials that age beautifully.
27596b2d80524a54b22d711cbab80f23
The safari chair he makes
after seeing photographs–
911a95fd7d694abe870b469e7c528e9b
–of similar chairs
being used on the savannah in Africa.
5e10d2de4e7543ffaa7af460c6df49a9
He is obsessed with his design
fitting the human body.
82c91d78a69044a29d1dd6555fe7c4d5
Kaare Klint studies the Shaker sect
and their aesthetics.
bca36b4d21714de5a9c19ad8cad73fbd
Kaare Klint was fascinated by the Shaker movement
and found a chair.
8d0473a7da0847cc9a281e277d9033f1
He made a copy and taught
his students about it.
f35a5c93fb3c4b74b4282411fdb81d1b
He also asked American museums–
9925e787ea9d4a9b9fb7461235eff6bd
–for more information about the furniture.
ee2db4d42f3a40fb9b35c3a4921a2c5b
Kaare Klint translates and takes in
the Shaker sect's ideas about form–
99093321a13a46ac97a88865937c2fd7
–that regularity is beautiful.
f7025463f4fb43f9a4a24fb49121ccce
Order creates the basis for beauty.
f46eeae1e78f4857840fd3f2b6aa471b
And beauty rests on usefulness.
3786ed5ce0a849e78d6a9f8e468150f1
They hang up the furniture on the wall,
which makes it easy to clean.
479d3c07bc694a65b2e3b81ddd2ec391
Everything is about a fixation on order.
fcd17b4c08d2473e815d2ed42eefef68
When Kaare Klint makes chairs
for churches, the form is an echo–
e6a70816ed504552a47685613e9ea411
–from Italian peasant chairs, churches
and the Shaker movement's dining chairs.
687135d69b654f5991f8f3a24b3efc64
The first church chairs Klint makes
are for Betlehemskyrkan.
a5e78cd57b0d41ee88cf93afd882b611
And those in Grundtvigs church
are almost the same.
144c8ad4acd3427397f8d6d963538ee0
What Klint does is that he improves,
simplifies and refines the chairs.
7618f42630ac40cb8f27ceb0d9a943d6
It is what all Danish design is about
– to refine and simplify.
72abbd762d9f4b1ebbcea886d11ae1ef
The Shaker sect's name comes from the
shaking movements they make in prayer–
efbfcb2b54e94d948106a46b8cf70f73
–and they live in celibacy.
1027315905684bd88c434b39ebc702ac
In our day, the renewal is scarce,
and the group is largely gone.
c40444999da64ca0a2e1e12f36c916ba
But not in Denmark.
d464f0d9a17b4ab6881cd520a494e84b
Here lives their furniture aesthetics
in the highest degree.
2739ba702f4b43dc91ed4950d1038c72
For Kaare Klint, for a long time
professor at the Royal Art Academy–
53b507ec7cc54c4fbe7ee1c4571ee6b6
–spread the Shakers' teaching
and early functionalism–
c861e0f801de4e84ac615e66a8967747
–to generations
of young designers.
01a2592e03214a7cb7be3e1bbaea97c4
That got great importance for his students.
9dd194855cad4d4e990333e96ebabdb6
Take Børge Mogensens Folkestol J39–
2266d34741e84c9e8067ca25ffa6f888
–a re-interpretation of the Shaker chairs.
35ec9b0b895b42ce910134cb0372986d
Wegner does it too.
He makes a Shaker rocking chair.
b0931e50be064179903259fda1c9413f
Almost everyone relates to it.
bc265bf084c540b0ab20a243580e93db
They get a completely divine status.
060447c439de450984701d94c5635b80
The Shakers' divine status
is also imprinted–
d18e383b9e6e4697aaea876fa54a56ea
–in the Icelandic designer
Sveinn Kjarval.
22d0dcb76f6b4ffdac544d257f15efb8
When he goes to the art academy in
Copenhagen, Hans Wegner is the head teacher–
0ab8a50b60b4423f98dfab040667a8ca
–and Wegner continues to teach
what he has learned from Kaare Klint–
1ddddcd61d2f4f92955fb7a49c59469c
–and the inspiration
from the Shaker movement.
8805df3cd11c48f7a03b2a609520306d
The furniture by Sveinn Kjarval
that are here are from...
24afe25dc9034f44b9b55e4b07db3f0f
...the first years after the education.
0c6ac5129cf54ab7997d6ce8a55090d0
He tried himself out with them.
7005bc1055ee47b7835238b499239147
When Sveinn Kjarval is back
in Iceland, he gets the commission–
5dfa325ec3f0476ea005b7e706bb38bf
–to make the furniture for the Icelandic
prime minister's summer cottage.
19c3c13b77144d758e623c0e66fd32f2
That place is called Klettur.
b2cb3cdac30a45b899973e017882258e
My grandfather, Hermann Jónasson,
was prime minister.
2947ccfdd2e04dd68a33867f26c99b4a
Here has always been spoken with great respect
about these furniture.
334b84e018a141aaa10b8c4be9e9c000
It was said with almost religious tone–
699f48b6a74f4fffa426e83b4772904f
–that "these furniture Kjarval made".
735401c87e934edeb3f3035774e50dce
And just like Hans Wegner
and Kaare Klint did earlier–
64e68bb4811e4eab86322de6a85f878a
–does now Sveinn Kjarval a rocking chair
inspired by the Shaker movement.
9bd991f6996a4ef2820ae5ae481ec64c
The rocking chair was worked out there.
0b2c0bec186d40f4b1ef08eb30355eba
And the end result became
a very neat chair.
726cd767a78244f4a9d47af2ec7917b9
The model was Shaker chairs from USA.
d8e35e5ff2d14f8e8dd8fd2ec7c44414
The rocking chair is of course...
4e2d5f3263c448e8a2bcdb179de4d88a
...a piece of furniture that Kjarval made
for many Icelandic homes.
c83fcf1f662e4452b54d2e334b1238d0
It is found little everywhere
and is a very beautiful chair.
bb5d0ab5d68448aea9e7a0e2d051e91c
I have many favorites
among Swedish designers.
c2a4a01edcee40c3b529584b64046fe1
Like Gunnar Asplund. Swedish Grace
was also architecture, textile, painting...
50802f2d610846ba84e299c544899702
Carl Malmstens furniture.
5f82309172da41a49b59a88fb8c2d3f5
And of course Axel Einar Hjorth,
whom I collect.
daf537a6a4db42f39546ddb3c700b36a
Here in the house is he well represented,
with many furniture.
5e2a14d0b4a4450a90e87de57bf375cc
I have chairs, several sofas,
tables, consoles...
a317285499214e8982f3c3d7f2981ced
Axel Einar Hjort is the foster child–
b67a787840854330a9d8b3a47d9cb005
–who becomes chief architect
at the department store NK in Stockholm–
27fecabe60dd40cd8500187419c57b62
–and who has an ability to follow with
in the times' shifting ideals and needs.
192fdcc8aaa7426eadc5baf494a1b88a
As when he goes from Art Deco furniture
in exclusive wood types–
5f4bc29cdb084cfa9ae4e8ba16ba324d
–to foresee the need for simple
cabin furniture in pine.
6020f8285f0f410b9e4695396b11b523
The cabin movement was a big deal
in the late 20s.
42bd988ff20e4ef3b954edcadbda105f
14 days of vacation came–
18bf30cf9fe948eeb2ae96236cab2278
–and it was the whole health care,
the people should be in nature.
814566535f6d4f7b8146206243dde05e
And perhaps not just camping,
but have a small cabin to live in.
22bcf3cb0898405e9e234bab8800e596
And then they needed
to be able to furnish them.
ec051b5806ee41109b28507a85832853
The vacation legislation is a fact
and an important such.
7b6198ed4919452cbae38abe0ea3efee
Swedish wage earners have at least 12 days
per year for uplifting recreation.
f6cd8daee9174d8db166c8796668c2e8
It is a part
of the social democratic idea–
b42a4826b20140809ff8454311f8b533
–to create a society
where the citizens are well–
76e9e8d26142439d86755b2e9e94a8ff
–have vacation
and can take care of their children.
9088780a480c4451b57d23b622bf1920
A part of the vacation
is what one does.
41f7da64fc8344699e83c453116d22a3
We have a fear that people
will drink too much alcohol–
f19dcc8d440346db856d6cc04e0c7dd0
–so it was necessary to find on things
that people do.
fe86ce296865408dbc2b56f44f63c842
The cabin exhibition in Stockholm
has been opened for the year.
ffab65024e6449de9778f4700b148af1
It is fully furnished,
and everything is ready for occupancy.
4055a3d1102249a78310add34017d26b
Then he designed
a series of cabin furniture–
4e16ae766863425aa9e658fa634cf718
–that would be in rough pine,
because it was nature romantic.
cb71f266642d4c70b97c3609f9712f7f
NK opened a special department on
Regeringsgatan for cabin furniture.
d51e0ccbebca41cd834e2237b4b3232c
And the customer base was
in Stockholm's archipelago.
016a3b13a6d94e798654b121c4ed36cb
There was something with the pines on the islands.
77823ebb27934a71825b321d65364121
It fitted with the dream of the
simple life in Stockholm's archipelago.
68e916176aa34fa496100f18a82fee4d
His strength was
to catch up with what was in the time.
b0df11c8fe2b4ae2be64c46795853f03
Now it was cabin furniture,
and then he designed a whole series.
193dd1117bfb4cc5bc399369a96e1064
It is utility furniture, I think it is comfortable.
0367f01485ad46f9b8034ba4449a3c64
People were surprised.
It was considered a bit rustic–
2ee95093811347cd866ce5635cd373c3
–and that it clashed
with more urban interiors.
3bdb619452c14cdfb1e56e24c17056fe
But I thought that eclecticism
and style breaks in an interior–
d439a107777842a6aa3d780db8e45104
–could be interesting. The chic is
just eclecticism and the contrasts.
364d17f7b29a44ea836c7b90a1777cfb
Under many years was the designer Axel
Einar Hjort largely forgotten.
ffe810bfd65742b8b43cac43706b600d
His pine furniture that people
had in Swedish summer cabins–
1efb2df9953b46c99058f6e4e30f992c
–were no longer considered valuable.
3df63e52551e4f58a00f7cd1cd3d1572
Many of the pine furniture that people
had, they put on the bonfire.
30f0c3ffc3b04d339cb1925e62e0a345
For they do not look like anything
exclusive.
c3c4683762ee4bc2a328bcc6c0502ec1
In our day stands Axel Einar Hjorts
cabin furniture instead–
7fb8b36b322b463c8be293e46fbdc5d1
–in the world's most exclusive
and costly homes.
12228e646179458aa2dd3995f876f0ab
As here with Pierre Yovanovitch–
ff2567e9fd134d14ac2f9daae4007242
–and in the TV star Kim Kardashian's
living room.
7540fc17c65f45b49211943b6ecb62f3
The previously forgotten designer
with absolute ear for the times' needs–
35ecdb5ab4a841a0885d7020632eb3ca
–has again been right.
90dc459788c24fc5b31bc37c4ed6fc59
When functionalism
comes to Norway–
36a59e99a9494ed1babf17ef0d6190be
–it is in the form of an undaunted, radical
and uncompromising designer–
13e905c378164577bb3e091ed51d6e14
–Nora Gulbrandsen.
f836e23f06724fe4ab6ed377a58b0d06
She shakes up the sleepy
porcelain factory Porsgrund–
c65f6cbbac204890aa79840416f58399
–with her strong colors
and daring forms.
429d2d780be04c49b513ffdac6c7b760
It aroused great attention and
was described as Porsgrund's salvation.
dd322f7e4b3f48e98e91f7f338e9e1e8
Nora Gulbrandsen became
a fresh, new wind that swept in.
c5fa1eb3d5b94f5db52898600d3805e6
During the study time
has Nora Gulbrandsen experimented–
fd0ae20d00994b978248501ce723cef1
–with mixing funk with Art Deco.
6a87a25e36da433eaed009be76e5967a
And when she as a divorced mother
comes to Porsgrund–
579249eb73cb43aaae517ddcf45311e1
–uses she the porcelain
to tell that a new time is here.
ffea421098bf4a7c955a226b2488d08c
Nora Gulbrandsen was a modern
woman who decided over her own life.
4121bf53a2fb4e79beab2a1b64876d6b
That one sees also in the decor,
especially in a decor from 1928–
6895ef74d0da4aefac5a3a77b6d30c27
–on a vase with male and female
tennis players, an airplane and a car.
12b5a246de884799a3a0c9045cd7e614
She shows the most modern.
32317dc659764d00a1fe0d5a9557d0fb
To play tennis in short skirt
is a modern phenomenon.
a7e1be284aec4783b587fd76dafd0d64
She illustrates changes and shifts–
77b303f406f64734a2a341a7128472b9
–that occurred in the Norwegian society
at that time.
98f57cc274c241f8b735b5b44782b143
Not only Gulbrandsen's porcelain
shows a new time for women in Norway.
480815f409bf442bb4916be5b76bcc19
Gulbrandsen becomes soon
chief designer at the porcelain factory–
cdb25d9417ac4f6b9bd0dd78be5525b9
–and creates
daring and functionalist porcelain–
30740d7cff264dacbd4012f0d0abcdc7
–with cubist patterns, spherical
forms and contrasting colors.
c2395700065d4ec6a4b22efe6f9a197a
The stripes follow the form, but since
it is also a shading–
849b265dc253474798502ec0ce0a8aee
–gives it a life, so it looks almost like
pipes lying on top.
0a408e1c9b6346a0aaadcc0a317cb77f
She perceived herself
as functionalist, but not ideologically.
e05d4df7220948dcb6cf08bac4f02023
Rather as adaptation
to a modern life–
143b4a854a504659b28daa257e09d059
–where the practical should fit in the home.
1d42258872f248fca6a5996637a7e8af
But in Sweden is functionalism
strongly ideological.
ba851c72842843308a0412ac1ae47663
It goes hand in hand with the
social democratic folk home idea–
d47641653aeb472e84d221adb5588288
–that the large social clefts
should disappear–
52efb8f9f6fd41ac886b5f07b4225ae5
–and poor-Sweden's
cramped and draughty residences should go.
8be02a8f5ad2479d90a75fe5120bae11
Functionalism became a part
of a social democratic ideology–
46d315798663492c83620b974cc4102c
–that wanted to create a better and more
equal and just society.
dfd827648423456da8e998ed51ea7d14
The architecture and design
became a kind of expression–
8ed877095eb047c08d2a35c8f76edc79
–of a modern world.
afbc6114e7c6422e911e9d53759ef093
The Swedish functionalism–
8f56d3a6318849c7a592458cf937c043
–strikes down as a bomb
on Stockholm's exhibition 1930.
6694133ce8ef4514bf7a2697cc0aacb3
This exhibition
was a gigantic undertaking.
bfa4c864232e4f029d9d55777eac4bfb
It is almost impossible to understand today.
d3ef4a7884164a9da09353cd93ed222f
The first day came 80,000 people.
d84226b766fc4945b677f45e2f38c639
It is on level with a Taylor Swift-
concert. It is unfathomable much.
a0a0062597c143cf81a19219cba13338
Exhibition architect Gunnar Asplund–
502e5b85afd746f2b7013fd8f52a6f68
–designs simple, airy and light
exhibition halls to the area.
4a08a2d59aa44ea3a12d50949b80712b
The center in this
was the housing exhibition.
631e73a472164fc287a8b95b474c5ce5
Everything was functionalist.
6a03ad8fb50049b1b6fe802323037691
The box-like buildings,
the smooth facades–
a5d96672a312498e9be2f04e781b29a8
–the flat roofs
and geometric forms.
fa6a863ca3f64511b0963a463a254261
And the furniture in these houses
followed the same ideals.
d6b6600fd07e4b2db97e446199a195fd
It was focus on the material,
rather than on ornament.
49b7335e2e674712959efabc85e46042
But far from everyone appreciates
the clean, smooth future vision.
1b805c4958264c8e9752f5a5f5835f13
An infected culture debate between
functionalists and traditionalists–
6df5736311d340f7bab412af45ae8e5b
–rages on the newspapers' debate pages.
57fb05e904844f039091b6406bb59d41
I believe that we have had
a greater or broader culture debate–
1fbfb3b727c04ba4a104c3ede04546c0
–than around the funk exhibition. The whole
nation was at each other's throats.
2dd3330b014f4a78be091da920382f8d
Hand in hair and knife in throat.
566f38f0ba054be7bc6222622a11711c
One of the clearest advocates
for traditionalism was Carl Malmsten.
3b42d23ba8eb43d3a31542044f07d200
He had had a tough school time and
thought the school was over theoretical.
35bb5bb4d3864045af64b17bf6db7c2d
He found home at the workbench.
f017c4d757fc42f08e85e4be41cc4151
Childhood experiences are the
that deepest imprint on people–
93fdaa1fe0c24372aad676fa77d9d90d
–and set the all deepest
and most indelible traces–
7e9c5b1695434814bfc11922479112f9
–in the soft
and receptive child's soul.
4965516841164a23948b78d24ad9fbd5
He was afraid that functionalism
and mass production would make–
24fb45894b6946338002bfbb33b7c25e
–the craft
fall behind.
08a590654a624653a8ac66b96554ae16
For Carl Malmsten who created furniture
in Swedish Grace style–
56def8e799524cc9930a901c4cb8aafa
–both for Stockholm's concert hall
and Stockholm's city hall–
c64819d20aa149a49fd823b242ce0d9e
–is the new functionalism
quite anti-human.
0cc48abfbbe5409682179d1e250d7c46
My teaching is to give outlet
for what the man has within himself.
98b41595cfc44748bbbabe8c2091e05e
An instrument for that outlet
is our finely constructed hand–
ddce4f0673504a11a7180f2705e50176
–sensitive and useful to everything,
even to murder people.
9adf05affe684162b72b088dce41ada8
But it is better if one makes things
that are marked by one's inner–
c46d84e4bcb04acf8790ceb00725f410
–that one can have in one's home
or give to one's friends.
83cd3ac0e4a24be5be7b9a77a956f8a7
Seen from today had he perhaps right in
that the craft disappeared in Sweden.
f344b6d7dee74a1793ac5d3bfa713bd9
Carl Malmsten worked against the wind,
for functionalism broke through.
7394ec5fe711423594611ca759157bd2
One of those who take to the
modern style is Axel Einar Hjort–
7aa3aa5b9b8b499c82893aa758b67704
–the designer who devoted himself to
Swedish Grace and cabin furniture.
45d8cd9cbac14ac8a48bf3514e49fc88
He is now functionalist.
0e8598b97cbd4c49819169914dc1cf0e
Axel Einar Hjort
had his finger on the pulse and understood–
e86552609b1c40c2919ca0ee19f44022
–when it was time to turn
towards a more functionalist ideal.
1e92127f7e504bdba4b8806a4008ba7c
It is red. That is what I thought.
9617311678dd4612acd793819b1e6c17
Strange that I have not unpacked it.
I am Jac's grandchild–
0de2e59af9374325aa1be37b1f06a05b
–and actually have no other
Luxo lamps at home.
77086113efa14f6bb9c5dd870e3ea3e1
We got to follow down to his basement
when we were there.
948980d5d0544b1ea72e70ca847e03ef
Then sat we grandchildren in a row, while
he showed his latest invention.
08d6c6dd88df4911a681969b822e7f05
Then got we to vote on what was best.
aa753ba5e7444e0c9e5078ee54a50b04
So it feels almost
as if I had designed it myself.
de3949ee6a1a444e8d2d4b4d9365833a
It is in a package with sewing machines
sent from England–
26daf31a85d341998ec247d15861b1e4
–that the Norwegian engineer
Jac Jacobsen finds it–
115443e7c96f42a8924e9694e10978fc
–that will change both his and countless
industrial workers' lives forever.
db15c0ee5d9440d995e988e9aa075106
One day was there a lamp in the package,
a lamp that I had never seen the like of.
89555e4a14e64dd2b27eb190e38f2c24
And I thought that it was something special.
59d90912f7e64b71a3b5eafc36051ae0
With industrialization
grows the need for good work light.
418bb7e5a7384413899cab1dd78f5b81
Engineer Jac Jacobsen understands
that he has stumbled upon gold–
e96cf5b56dab41c7ac7e89971a164153
–and comes to agreement
with the English lamp manufacturer–
88a63a80ee0648f2a865c6f42bacebdb
–that he will make a similar,
but improved, Norwegian version–
ca6a92384f964dd093426ca4dec1e013
–of the Anglepoise lamp.
b372e67d62fe4e55aa6c31539ef68708
He unscrewed the parts and saw
that there was an improvement potential.
1b3bd6200cf446ce8190e7034bf4983f
Jac was a problem solver with engineering-
thinking. He would solve the problem–
3d77b319f2ec4a0294d3699cae038ea7
–with that workers, offices, schools
and universities did not have good light.
a132721bfe084dfca32e92897617a6bc
People thought
that the crane-like monster–
3473224e85624f95b3c4b74d366d87f3
–was not beautiful enough
to have on a nice desk.
ae492aac45f142668bb6a1696d5119de
But...
68f97961b4c64ca3bc4402a93b9a2f2d
But the construction won out in the end.
60d1c0703c644259aa22585438731544
He named the lamp 1 001–
cfa029bf6d0b4c1a8c52e3a5b159adf2
–for it could assume
1 001 different positions–
abf14329c9e64ed5bc2cefd4aadb22c4
–all depending on how one wanted the light.
1f9b82ed45eb4d04b66bd1f4c5cedd83
But 1 001 did not succeed internationally–
1a0f13d776854f69b74bd1f4c5cedd83
–so it was renamed to Luxo,
which means "I shine" in Latin.
ffab65024e6449de9778f4700b148af1
The Luxo lamp becomes quickly popular
also outside the workplaces–
58b1885bc5154c1789cf1344650269d8
–and soon takes the lamp
all the way to Hollywood.
4b539d7d03bd4516b36120d9bd5d155a
As a child I saw Luxo lamps everywhere.
109f7807e5a34e279c8035508dafc95c
Everyone had one
at the desk and in the bedroom.
10fdd30de4214af18c2a826572bed28c
But the first time I was impressed
was when I saw "E.T.".
33bc4f2bc4ba435196dd41c2fae61dc5
Elliot pretended to be sick
to be able to stay home with E.T.–
dbdc3618b41949d0a43b7e8f24e381ea
–and warmed the thermometer
on the light bulb.
01f648ed6f1144cca8101ea912ba4c15
We were speechless with admiration and thought
that the Luxo lamp had the leading role.
36d58c647e8f47d9bcf240cfef671ff6
When the animation company Pixar
wants to market a new computer–
ce7273a798064a8e96833552af68a970
–makes they an animated short film where
a playful Luxo lamp has the leading role.
1056ec8bbda9436cb2e5acc57aae9da1
The film "Luxo Junior" is nominated
for an Oscar–
ce75e50ffbd24a99978af163cfa4ebdd
–and becomes so beloved
that it becomes Pixar Studios' symbol.
5c9397bafb7d45d8b749c81366cb90ed
And after that has the lamp had a
self-evident place in several Pixar films.
4e9e1832bbe24ecc9d2c64e5f9645302
The Luxo lamp has made a serious class journey.
42d500f4bbd8479481ee4e902ddd7b3a
It was intended to be
a work lamp–
2e67c31f0bd64101807b7002a663d685
–but now has it landed
among the fancy products–
cb7b4859b21c4887a2e79109e17bff88
–and has become a symbol
for good taste.
148fe6aa587b4b9393d71f60be03babd
From workhorse to design icon.
0c7ec2739c694bd79cef7853714a694d
The Danish light
that was created by Poul Henningsen–
89e46d80269545c79e905821e9c12f64
–and takes the world by storm
at the Paris exhibition 1925–
9ca74aa719854097aa876704901c3fae
–gets now to light in competition
with the Norwegian Luxo lamp.
421fcef04543419082a750aeafafee10
But the Nordic light
will soon be darkened.
049f389b7db745febe7baabb87488cc5
The Nazis close down the
influential, avant-garde–
72ee80e8603148cab3001c5b0f6c3da5
–art school Bauhaus 1933–
874ff3b1f55a47ae80edfdb1204b5dd8
–the same year
as Hitler comes to power.
8912887b22ca42739fa517eddb77024a
The hopeful interwar period that
creates light that makes mothers beautiful–
5302bc786f464f1a9a817cdc4c7796b4
–hospitals where color, form and function
heal sick tuberculosis patients–
7ffbfa35aab34b08a4122a35432607b9
–and where vacation furniture is built for
idle workers, is blown away.
c3328f2147b94e9d99922041275894a7
The radio sets in bakelite
gather anxious families–
f5eb6e1d037441b18a983fab88157ce9
–who listen to Hitler's propaganda
and news broadcasts.
7eb8e9f961c14edbb8ff5e0035cc4c7b
The terrible that we hoped
the world would be spared from–
78f90740e32441feaceae94e246cb064
–has occurred.
ff3520e175de4257b13f78cb435a959e
For 20 years ago were my projects–
e4791446f7c54403bc227ba72928162c
–more minimalist, more radical.
With time have I realized...
707a070df99e4dd7b57997fcc67ec8a8
...that it does not always feel good
when it is too empty, too white...
6091302062d84b36baec34047b996272
People need more welcoming furniture.
8c30240f1e8b4add827beb5137d39175
I think that is what
rustic furniture gives.
e0a69c3a2a3e4061b10be20fd25884d0
That it is not perfect, that it is simple.
88a987e6a41645a4adebc7315be92ea9
A collection consists of a lot of objects.
e17c78eb9f1e47f68c3e6f1c61c19c26
Here are furniture from Sweden, Denmark,
USA, France and those I have created myself.
10797bd8006b4f21a9c7f314e809df47
It is the nice thing with a house,
that the house is alive and has a context.
8a5aa010aedf45ccb0c17db51b1c49a8
It is messy here.
d07b51c006bf473a80928e72828ee65a
In our day have I approximately 1,450 chairs,
mainly from Scandinavia.
408a01ba34424f8284d3878f7bcc5298
A chair is something one sits on.
36d456380d72408fa3e99ef0ca6b1383
But now are the chairs sitting on me.
0d2594c7702b4648bff7ed80e55dbbf2
Translation: A M-Bjerned, B Bäckman,
Y Hellerud, R Schicke, J Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext for SVT
0909e04a5d9c46a98a4c14bd29835afa
Subtitles: Jenny Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext for SVT